It's rolling.
508.
Where am I calling?
Massachusetts.
Central Mass.
Boston is 617.
We used to be 617 some years ago.
So you have a lot of Irish readers up here.
Is that right?
I suppose so.
Worcester and Boston.
As many as you'll find anywhere at this point.
I do have a couple of papers elsewhere, so we'll hope to make this of general interest, not just...
Not just in the land of the college.
Yeah.
Well, of course, you know, Holy Cross College is here in Worcester.
This is Worcester, basically.
Yeah, yeah.
And I have readers in the Boston area because I'm in Quincy as well.
The Quincy paper takes my call.
So tell me a little bit about this.
It's a pretty bold title, don't you think?
Yeah, it is.
Tell me if you don't mind.
Have you read any of it?
Oh, yeah.
Okay, all right.
I just wanted to hear what your level was before we got started.
My level of what?
Of what you've...
what you've read of the book or what you can understand.
Well, I mean, I have every kind of interviewer at this point.
I've had those who've read a couple of pages, those who've read nothing at all.
Well, I would say I'm knowledgeable on the subject.
All right.
I've just written my own book, as a matter of fact, which Holt is publishing, and it's on the preservation of libraries and texts.
Oh, really?
Yeah, it's a school week.
I don't have to have this on.
We're back on again.
So anyway, we talked about the bold title.
Let's start with that.
The concept of the Irish saving civilization.
What they really saved was the content of civilization, which is its books.
As I say several times during the book, I think it's pretty...
conclusive that without them we would certainly have lost most of or perhaps all of latin literature we wouldn't have lost greek because there was an eastern empire that survived the crash of the western empire and greek would probably be available to us someplace or another you're talking about as a language or as a relic as a literature greek you know i mean you know
But much of Greek literature was lost anyway.
I mean, most of the plays of the three great tragedians are gone.
We have a few plays of each one, and each one of them wrote about 80 plays, I think.
Most of those are gone.
It's not coverable unless we have another Qumran discovery.
But I think what's more important is that
with the loss of the literature would have been lost the habit of mind, the literate habit of mind.
And without the Irish, without their copying those books during the 100-year period that really goes from the end of the 5th century to the end of the 6th century,
I think Western Europe would probably have become Muslim.
And therefore would have been a very, very different, would have taken a very different turn from what it did take.
And does this preclude the efforts of other monks or were the Irish the only monks, the only scribes?
Well, they really... I mean, there was a pretty, pretty significant monastery at Monte Cassino, for instance.
Yeah, but that's later, that's 6th century.
Yeah.
You know, Benedict doesn't get under, you know, Benedict...
It misses out by 100 years.
The really crucial period is from the fall of Rome, which is 476, to the end of the, so really from the last quarter of the 5th century to the end of the 6th century.
It's about a 100-year period.
And during that period, as far as we can make out, I can only count
two libraries on the continent.
Actually, really only one, because the other, one, two, or three, but probably only one library that we are aware of, and let's say there were a few more.
The art of copying had just come to an end.
Could you identify the two libraries for me?
Well, the most important one would be Vivarium,
By the end of the 4th century, one writer says that all the libraries of Rome have been closed.
That may be a hyperbole, but certainly by the end of the 5th century,
the copying had stopped.
Gregory the Great established a library at Rome, but that's in the 6th century.
And it was a very small library, and it was... Gregory, so far as we know, didn't really know any Greek, and there probably wasn't...
much there in the way of Plato and those people.
And he also didn't, he was against the reading of the pagan classics.
So we don't really know what his library was made up of, but we assume that it was a pretty small library.
Isidore of Seville, at the end of the 6th century, builds a library.
And it's a great library.
It's the sort of first great library of the Dark Ages.
The only other one that we know about is Cassiodorus's
which he called Vivarium, and that was in Calabria.
In my book, I pick up with Cassi Doris.
It really is.
I have to say, this subject that you're writing about has really not been touched to any great extent, has it?
No, it hasn't, and it's very hard to come by information on what the monks did.
We know that there was this 100-year period.
We know that within 100 years,
that during that period the copying had stopped, and therefore if it hadn't been resumed, the link would have been permanently broken.
But an awful lot about what the Irish monks did is a mystery.
What does Isaac Taylor say about the history of the transmission of text from ancient times?
Are you familiar with that book?
I know what it is.
I'm wondering.
I use it as a source, but not to any great extent in my own book.
You know, we've heard about the... This is a very interesting book to me, you know, when Marley... I'm sorry to interrupt.
Go ahead.
No, go ahead.
But you mentioned Cassiodorus is coming up in the sixth century.
Well, you know, but that's really, you know, we're well into the sixth century there.
And, I mean, that is during the hundred-year period that I'm talking about.
But that's it.
Those are the three libraries, and depending on how you rate them, you know...
Certainly Isidore of Seville is the beginning of sort of the new era.
And Cassiodorus, it's a little hard to know.
We don't know very much about it.
We don't know what happened to it.
The paper library continued and became larger and larger.
And it was Gregory the Great that established it.
He also sent Augustine to England.
He sent Augustine to England, but that's almost 150 years after Patrick.
It seems at that point, and you've got this great figure of Gregory the Great, he's truly a great figure, mounting the first papal mission to the barbarians, but it took him a century and a half longer than it took Patrick.
So there's a big...
There's a big gap there in which it seems the continental Christians had more than enough to do just to keep themselves from becoming victims and did very little else during that period.
How do you account for this, I mean, for this hundred-year miracle?
What do you... Well, in a way, it's simple.
It's one of the sort of serendipities of history that the last people on Earth who should have been right for this role were the Irish.
And you're clear about that very early on in the book, too.
As I said, they're sort of child, you know, warrior children, basically, where they're killing one another and
stealing one another's cattle, and that was what they did.
I mean, that was all they did.
Patrick impressed the hell out of them because he was such a strong-minded character.
And Patrick, though himself kind of almost quasi-literate, I mean, he was literate, but he was not literate.
Cicero would hardly have called him literate.
He knew perfectly well that Christianity couldn't survive without literacy.
So literacy comes with Patrick, and once the Irish learn to read, they obviously get this great kick out of it.
I mean, that's my own interpretation, but they enjoy the copying of the books, which another...
group of people might have considered a great bore, they just enjoy it, and they make it into something.
Again, you say this does predate the precepts of Benedict, right?
Oh, yeah.
Because he did institutionalize.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, he actually set down the terms by which copying is done, by which scribes worked.
Yes, but he's still 100 years later.
He's still after the transition.
So the stuff that they worked from was the stuff that was passed on to them by the Irish scribes?
Basically, I think that's true.
I don't think I can prove it.
But we know that Benedict and his monks follow the Irish and overwhelm them.
Chronologically, they follow.
But do you think they had any ancient stuff to work with themselves?
Or do you think all the primary stuff was by then destroyed?
Most of it should have been gone.
There would have to have been very little left.
You know, you can't
I mean, there's no way at this point in time of saying what was there and what wasn't.
One of the things that
my editor, Nan Talese, wanted me to do was to say exactly which manuscripts they say.
And there's just no way of... How can you possibly say that?
Well, you know, it's a historical problem, but... Is that right?
She wanted you to say precisely which ones they saved?
Huh?
She wanted you to say precisely what was saved?
Yes.
Well, I understand the question, but I also... She should look into the sources a little bit.
I mean, it is vague.
I mean, you just have to know that there's a tradition here at work.
Well, the other thing is that most of what they saved is now lost in the sense that we don't... You know, a book like the Book of Kells is an extraordinary exception.
You know, there are only a few hundred Irish codexes left.
So most of what they actually did is gone.
So we can't say they did this, this, or the other thing.
We can say, well, from what's left, we can say that the Irish codex was not merely...
copying of one book, but was a collection often of as many things as the scribe could put into a book.
It was a kind of mixed media event.
And we know that one way or another, I mean, most of our own manuscripts, say, of Virgil are much later than this period.
There's very little from this period left.
There are a few things
Some of our oldest manuscripts are Celtic manuscripts.
Yeah, but I'm picking up now when people like Poggio and Patroc and Boccaccio and they start going to Monte Cassino and St.
Gall and these places, and they're discovering these things buried under dust and mice, the droppings and stuff like that, and they find Quintilian and all these others.
Are they finding, by your feeling, Irish manuscripts?
copies, or are they finding, you know, when we talk about the rediscovery of ancient texts, and I'm going away from Ireland now, again, I'm in the continent, you know, we have this humanist rediscovery of classic texts.
I don't think there's any way of knowing.
And I'm not trying to challenge your thesis here, but it's a question, you know, it's a legitimate question, I think.
It is a legitimate question, and I think that the true answer is that we don't know what the early humanists were.
We often, at least, don't know what they were looking at.
Were some of those texts, Irish texts, I think they must have been.
But that's not a conclusion, that's an assumption.
We just don't know enough.
There's a wonderful account of when, I guess it was Boccaccio, I guess he just lifted...
a text from the Monte Cassino and of course he never said it but it was another it was another companion who reported it it was a Poggio I forget which one but this this is when he discovered Tacitus yeah and uh you know and I believe that that that that particular manuscript survives and it's in it because it's in a certain script and I don't know if it's an uncial script or something that that was quite
if not unique, but distinctive to what was practiced at that monastery.
Who's to say what the original source was for that?
I mean, I don't know.
I'm not picking, I guess.
I'm just curious about... Anyway, go ahead.
I'm sorry.
I'm making a comment.
No, much of this I sort of treated lightly because they're...
I mean, not only do I not know enough about it, but so far as I can make out, no one does.
It's a study yet to be done.
Yeah, well, now let's go back to the genesis.
How long have you been toying with this?
I have a feeling this goes back to student days.
You certainly credit a lot of Jesuits here in your accomplishments.
That's true.
Well, they're sort of the dim...
progenitors of this work.
But my wife and I spent a year in Ireland about almost 25 years ago.
Actually, exactly 25 years ago, which is frightening.
We did a book for Scribner.
It's called A Literary Guide to Ireland.
And it was a guide to the Ireland of the writers.
And as we went around, I became more and more fascinated by the early stuff.
and realized that very, very little had been done about it.
And I also, you know, gradually thinking about it, came to imagine this story as one of, you know, that was extremely paradoxical, the idea of these essentially wild and woolly people being the ones...
were given the role of saving civilization the only ones left the only the only country at peace and and literate enough to take up the task and yet they were such from given their personality and their culture they were such
such an odd choice if you could speak about it maybe their insularity helped in this particular case well i think it did and i think also the fact that this childlike quality i think also enabled them to to be the drones of the western world in effect you know to do this stuff over and over again um
something that might have bored the ass off more literate, more sophisticated people, they thought was a lot of fun, the way children think that repetitive tasks are fun.
Well, you think that this was undertaken for amusement and not for mission?
No, it was undertaken.
They were serious about it.
There's no question about that.
But when you look at the manuscripts,
you realize that they were also having an awful lot of fun, not only with the design, but you can see that in many cases the scribe has become bored with the actual text he's copying, and so he does something else.
Doodles.
That's wonderful.
I've seen these things.
They're wonderful.
Or, which is why we have all this early Irish literature,
He puts a little poem in the margin.
It might be his own or it might be something he heard somewhere as a child.
You know, you don't really know where he came upon it or what its origin is, but it's early Irish.
And therefore, by accumulation from all these glosses, we have the earliest vernacular literature of Europe in written form.
Thanks to the wandering minds of these scribes.
You quote some of them here, which are delightful.
Well, I think they're great.
I love them.
My favorite of all, I think, is the one about Pangra Band, because I think it really does give you the playful quality of the scribal mind.
You know, the one about the cat.
Mm-hmm.
because, you know, it's several stanzas and it's very, very well thought out.
And you can almost see the monk, you know, copying and also occasionally looking at his cat and is getting this sense of paradigm.
You know, that he's like the cat and the cat is like him.
And
just playing with it in his mind until the whole poem is there so he's going along as he's going along you can almost imagine you know writing a few copying out a few more things and then going back and trying another line of his poem until it you know finally is all there there is a really it's you can see a playful mind exercising itself right in the poem itself
So the genesis of this thing is 25 years ago, during a trip, your wife and yourself made to Ireland.
Yeah.
And, you know, bring me forward a little bit now.
I mean, that's when the germ was planted, I guess, the seed of it.
And I guess it just sat there, and I read various things.
And then about five years ago, when I came to work at Doubleday, Nan Talese, who was the editor and publisher of her own imprint.
I know Nan, by the way.
Yeah.
Okay, is she?
I didn't know she was a Hearn.
I didn't know the A was for a Hearn, but that's cute, too.
That's worth knowing.
Well, I thought I'd throw that in, you know.
I thought she was Italian.
That's just how much I know.
No, she's definitely not Italian.
I'm teasing her.
Don't tell her I said that.
I know Nan pretty well.
Go ahead.
No chance of that.
That's cute.
She married an Italian.
I'll tell you another thing about her in a minute.
I had just come to Doubleday as Director of Religious Publishing, and I met Nan at the first sales conference I went to, and I mentioned to her that I was working on a proposal that would be for a book called How the Irish Saved Civilization, and she said I want to see it right away.
So this was your title all along?
Yes.
Yes, it was.
I always thought that was... It was known as a ballsy... Well, why not?
Sure.
Well, basically, of course, it's comical and it's meant to.
You know, one of the salesmen said in his call reports, I don't know, he said these...
These booksellers keep ordering this book.
I keep telling them that it's a blank book.
That has its precursors.
When I was book editor at Worcester for many years, there was a book that came in one year, and it was the Irish Love Manual.
It was called Brace Yourself, Bridget.
Right.
Do you remember it?
It was published by St.
Martin's.
And you know what it was?
It was just blank.
It was all blank.
And any sucker who buys this deserves to be parted from his money, you know.
But anyway, go ahead.
Go ahead.
So that's how I wrote it.
I finally had to get down to brass tacks and finish it to complete the contract.
Nan herself has never been particularly interested in her Irish background.
Her father was Irish and her mother's family came over on the Mayflower, which I think is the part that she more nearly stressed.
But reading this manuscript, she realized how, and I always said to her, you know, you're extremely Irish, and she said she had no idea what I was talking about.
And then she came to the part of that Queen Maeve with whom she identified completely.
That's right.
You mentioned that in the notes.
And rightly so.
I mean, she has that kind of, you know, in the end, is unafraid to take on any task.
She's got immense willpower.
And, I mean, she's an Irish type, whether she knows it or not.
She does know it now.
And she's seen herself in this literature.
You also, let's hook this into St.
Patrick's Day if we can, because this is the occasion I'm using to get it out there.
This really is a, how do I get into this?
You're certainly telling the Irish people
Irish people, Irish Americans that, boy, you've got a lot to be proud of here.
It's not just St.
Patrick's day, St.
Patrick purportedly driving the snakes out of Ireland, right?
I think we're going a little deeper than that, aren't we?
I think he's remembered for all the wrong reasons.
I think he's one of the greatest figures of Western history.
And all we do is dye the beer green in his honor.
Remember, I live outside of Boston.
I know where you are.
There are really three things that he did that are extraordinary and actually unique.
And none of them had anything to do with snakes.
None of them had a thing to do with snakes.
The snakes were not there before he came, and they were not there after he left.
That's just, you know... That's a fact of... We don't want to say evolution here.
Well, it's the flora and fauna of Ireland never included snakes, period.
They just never got there.
The only snakes in Ireland are in the zoo, and that was always the case.
Three things.
Yeah, the first thing is that he is the first human being in history
So far as I can make out it, I'm virtually sure that I am standing on firm ground here.
The first human being in history to unequivocally condemn slavery as immoral.
And this is in a period in which no one thought about that.
I mean, you remember that St.
Paul said, slaves be obedient to your masters.
And he said that agreed four centuries before Patrick.
That's in the Bible, right?
Yeah.
Great.
It's in the New Testament.
Flaves be obedient to your masters.
That was the morality of the time, and nobody thought anything else.
But Patrick was a Roman citizen who was enslaved, wrongly enslaved, as I'm sure Roman citizens would have thought, by the Irish.
And having been at the receiving end of somebody else's brutality, he came to understand what that meant.
And he condemned slavery.
Nobody does that again until the Anabaptists in the 17th century.
We do not hear a peep out of anybody anywhere in the entire world on the subject of slavery until the 17th century, late 17th century.
Nothing recorded in any case.
And that's what we're talking about when we say history.
That's what history is.
That's exactly right.
I mean, of course, someone somewhere must have had this thought because it's a human thought to have.
But no one articulated it.
So he is, you know...
And then with the Anabaptists and the Quakers, you have the beginnings of the anti-slavery movement, which in the 18th and 19th centuries really took off.
But here's somebody way, way, way before all of that who knows exactly what he thinks of this and says it very, very clearly.
That in itself, I think, is of enormous significance.
The second thing is that he is...
I, by my life, actually the first missionary.
Christianity is five centuries old.
It is not a new religion.
Five centuries is a long time.
Sure is.
And, you know, we think of it that way because it's ten centuries removed from us, but five centuries is a lot of centuries.
When the Greek tragedians were writing about Homer, I was, you know, six, seven hundred years old.
I mean, people don't realize that, you know.
It was ancient to them.
Long time, you know.
I mean, the United States has lasted a little bit more than 200 years.
It seems a long time to us.
Five hundred is even longer.
So Christianity had a lot of time to develop
to reflect on what it was about.
And in the Gospels itself, Jesus orders the apostles to preach the Gospel to the ends of the earth.
They didn't go anywhere near the ends of the earth.
They never got out of the Mediterranean.
I mean, Christianity stayed within the Roman fold.
It stayed within the Roman Empire.
The only exception to that could be
Thomas going to India, most scholars very much doubt that he went to India, but let's assume that he did.
India was a civilization with many, many ties to the Greek world.
We're much more aware of that now than we once were, of how close India and Greece were to one another culturally.
So he didn't really go off to the fuzzy wuzzies.
Yeah, you use that phrase, the fuzzy wuzzies.
You know, the people of whom we are afraid, the people of whom civilized people are afraid, whoever they may be in a particular society or culture or time.
And the Romans were scared to death of the barbarians.
They wanted nothing to do with them.
They were beyond the pale.
They were unthinkable.
And Patrick does this.
He's the first person in history to preach to barbarians beyond the reach of Roman law.
which makes him, in many ways, the first missionary.
There just wasn't an awful lot of that.
Or, if you like, the second missionary.
There was not this rage to evangelize that we imagine there must have been.
It wasn't there.
And it's really, as a result of Patrick, I think, that Gregory the Great, a century later, a century and a half later, decides to push...
Augustine to go to Canterbury.
Augustine, this is a good example, this is a century and a half later.
Carried nine books with him.
Very good.
And if you read in Bede, as he goes across the continent from Rome to the coast of Gaul in preparation, he keeps sending messengers back to the Pope saying, we have all met together and we've decided this really isn't a good idea, okay?
Okay.
And finally, getting no positive answer, not the answer that he wants, Augustine himself returns.
It's not Augustine, huh?
It's Augustine.
Well, whichever you like.
Oh, go ahead.
For some reason, Catholics always say Augustine and Protestants say Augustine.
I'm neither.
I'm Greek.
And if anybody can tell me why that is, I don't know.
It's something that I, growing up, learned to say Augustine.
That's fine.
Others learned to say Augustine.
I'm teasing.
As I said, I'm Greek.
I'm neutral with this.
His mother called him Augustinus.
What do you do with that?
Go ahead.
Augustine.
finally comes back all the way to Rome from somewhere in Gaul.
He comes all the way back to Rome to see Gregory and say to Gregory, look, we really don't want to do this.
We think this is nuts.
We're all going to get killed.
And Gregory stares him down and says, when once you have put your hand to a task, do not turn back.
He's a pope.
He can get away.
He can say that.
Well, he's the pope, but he's also not the pope that the pope is today.
I mean, a large part of the
idea of the papacy was created by Gregory himself.
But he was Gregory the Great, right?
But he's such a huge personality, you know.
He obviously knew how to steer people down.
So this little Roman librarian, which is what Augustine was, you know, scurries back across the continent like a mouse, and by the time he arrives on the Isle of Thanet and confronts the King of Kent, he's shaking like a leaf.
You know, this is not
This is not Patrick.
This is somebody ordered to do this much, much against his own better judgment.
He expected to be boiled or something like that.
Did you give me the third Patrick item, by the way?
No, I didn't.
Okay.
All right, the third.
I'm sorry to get you there.
The third one is... Oh, hold on a second.
I've got to switch the tape.